
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc793

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc793#section-3.1

```
  TCP Header Format


    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |          Source Port          |       Destination Port        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                        Sequence Number                        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                    Acknowledgment Number                      |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |  Data |           |U|A|P|R|S|F|                               |
   | Offset| Reserved  |R|C|S|S|Y|I|            Window             |
   |       |           |G|K|H|T|N|N|                               |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |           Checksum            |         Urgent Pointer        |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                    Options                    |    Padding    |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |                             data                              |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```


https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc793#autoid-11

  Transmission is made reliable via the use of sequence numbers and
  acknowledgments.  Conceptually, each octet of data is assigned a
  sequence number.  The sequence number of the first octet of data in a
  segment is transmitted with that segment and is called the segment
  sequence number.  Segments also carry an acknowledgment number which
  is the sequence number of the next expected data octet of
  transmissions in the reverse direction.  When the TCP transmits a
  segment containing data, it puts a copy on a retransmission queue and
  starts a timer; when the acknowledgment for that data is received, the
  segment is deleted from the queue.  If the acknowledgment is not
  received before the timer runs out, the segment is retransmitted.

  An acknowledgment by TCP does not guarantee that the data has been
  delivered to the end user, but only that the receiving TCP has taken
  the responsibility to do so.
  
  To govern the flow of data between TCPs, a flow control mechanism is
  employed.  The receiving TCP reports a "window" to the sending TCP.
  This window specifies the number of octets, starting with the
  acknowledgment number, that the receiving TCP is currently prepared to
  receive.

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc793#section-3.2

  Before we can discuss very much about the operation of the TCP we need
  to introduce some detailed terminology.  The maintenance of a TCP
  connection requires the remembering of several variables.  We conceive
  of these variables being stored in a connection record called a
  Transmission Control Block or TCB.  Among the variables stored in the
  TCB are the local and remote socket numbers, the security and
  precedence of the connection, pointers to the user's send and receive
  buffers, pointers to the retransmit queue and to the current segment.
  In addition several variables relating to the send and receive
  sequence numbers are stored in the TCB.

    Send Sequence Variables

      SND.UNA - send unacknowledged
      SND.NXT - send next
      SND.WND - send window
      SND.UP  - send urgent pointer
      SND.WL1 - segment sequence number used for last window update
      SND.WL2 - segment acknowledgment number used for last window
                update
      ISS     - initial send sequence number

    Receive Sequence Variables

      RCV.NXT - receive next
      RCV.WND - receive window
      RCV.UP  - receive urgent pointer
      IRS     - initial receive sequence number

  The following diagrams may help to relate some of these variables to
  the sequence space.

  Send Sequence Space

                   1         2          3          4
              ----------|----------|----------|----------
                     SND.UNA    SND.NXT    SND.UNA
                                          +SND.WND

        1 - old sequence numbers which have been acknowledged
        2 - sequence numbers of unacknowledged data
        3 - sequence numbers allowed for new data transmission
        4 - future sequence numbers which are not yet allowed

                          Send Sequence Space

                               Figure 4.



  The send window is the portion of the sequence space labeled 3 in
  figure 4.

  Receive Sequence Space

                       1          2          3
                   ----------|----------|----------
                          RCV.NXT    RCV.NXT
                                    +RCV.WND

        1 - old sequence numbers which have been acknowledged
        2 - sequence numbers allowed for new reception
        3 - future sequence numbers which are not yet allowed

                         Receive Sequence Space

                               Figure 5.



  The receive window is the portion of the sequence space labeled 2 in
  figure 5.

  There are also some variables used frequently in the discussion that
  take their values from the fields of the current segment.

    Current Segment Variables

      SEG.SEQ - segment sequence number
      SEG.ACK - segment acknowledgment number
      SEG.LEN - segment length
      SEG.WND - segment window
      SEG.UP  - segment urgent pointer
      SEG.PRC - segment precedence value

  A connection progresses through a series of states during its
  lifetime.  The states are:  LISTEN, SYN-SENT, SYN-RECEIVED,
  ESTABLISHED, FIN-WAIT-1, FIN-WAIT-2, CLOSE-WAIT, CLOSING, LAST-ACK,
  TIME-WAIT, and the fictional state CLOSED.  CLOSED is fictional
  because it represents the state when there is no TCB, and therefore,
  no connection.  Briefly the meanings of the states are:

    LISTEN - represents waiting for a connection request from any remote
    TCP and port.

    SYN-SENT - represents waiting for a matching connection request
    after having sent a connection request.

    SYN-RECEIVED - represents waiting for a confirming connection
    request acknowledgment after having both received and sent a
    connection request.

    ESTABLISHED - represents an open connection, data received can be
    delivered to the user.  The normal state for the data transfer phase
    of the connection.

    FIN-WAIT-1 - represents waiting for a connection termination request
    from the remote TCP, or an acknowledgment of the connection
    termination request previously sent.

    FIN-WAIT-2 - represents waiting for a connection termination request
    from the remote TCP.

    CLOSE-WAIT - represents waiting for a connection termination request
    from the local user.

    CLOSING - represents waiting for a connection termination request
    acknowledgment from the remote TCP.

    LAST-ACK - represents waiting for an acknowledgment of the
    connection termination request previously sent to the remote TCP
    (which includes an acknowledgment of its connection termination
    request).

    TIME-WAIT - represents waiting for enough time to pass to be sure
    the remote TCP received the acknowledgment of its connection
    termination request.

    CLOSED - represents no connection state at all.

  A TCP connection progresses from one state to another in response to
  events.  The events are the user calls, OPEN, SEND, RECEIVE, CLOSE,
  ABORT, and STATUS; the incoming segments, particularly those
  containing the SYN, ACK, RST and FIN flags; and timeouts.

  The state diagram in figure 6 illustrates only state changes, together
  with the causing events and resulting actions, but addresses neither
  error conditions nor actions which are not connected with state
  changes.  In a later section, more detail is offered with respect to
  the reaction of the TCP to events.

  NOTE BENE:  this diagram is only a summary and must not be taken as
  the total specification.


https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc793#section-3.3

  A fundamental notion in the design is that every octet of data sent
  over a TCP connection has a sequence number.  Since every octet is
  sequenced, each of them can be acknowledged.  The acknowledgment
  mechanism employed is cumulative so that an acknowledgment of sequence
  number X indicates that all octets up to but not including X have been
  received.  This mechanism allows for straight-forward duplicate
  detection in the presence of retransmission.  Numbering of octets
  within a segment is that the first data octet immediately following
  the header is the lowest numbered, and the following octets are
  numbered consecutively.

  It is essential to remember that the actual sequence number space is
  finite, though very large.  This space ranges from 0 to 2**32 - 1.
  Since the space is finite, all arithmetic dealing with sequence
  numbers must be performed modulo 2**32.  This unsigned arithmetic
  preserves the relationship of sequence numbers as they cycle from
  2**32 - 1 to 0 again.  There are some subtleties to computer modulo
  arithmetic, so great care should be taken in programming the
  comparison of such values.  The symbol "=<" means "less than or equal"
  (modulo 2**32).

  The typical kinds of sequence number comparisons which the TCP must
  perform include:

    (a)  Determining that an acknowledgment refers to some sequence
         number sent but not yet acknowledged.

    (b)  Determining that all sequence numbers occupied by a segment
         have been acknowledged (e.g., to remove the segment from a
         retransmission queue).

    (c)  Determining that an incoming segment contains sequence numbers
         which are expected (i.e., that the segment "overlaps" the
         receive window).

  In response to sending data the TCP will receive acknowledgments.  The
  following comparisons are needed to process the acknowledgments.

    SND.UNA = oldest unacknowledged sequence number

    SND.NXT = next sequence number to be sent

    SEG.ACK = acknowledgment from the receiving TCP (next sequence
              number expected by the receiving TCP)

    SEG.SEQ = first sequence number of a segment

    SEG.LEN = the number of octets occupied by the data in the segment
              (counting SYN and FIN)

    SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 = last sequence number of a segment

  A new acknowledgment (called an "acceptable ack"), is one for which
  the inequality below holds:

    SND.UNA < SEG.ACK =< SND.NXT

  A segment on the retransmission queue is fully acknowledged if the sum
  of its sequence number and length is less or equal than the
  acknowledgment value in the incoming segment.

  When data is received the following comparisons are needed:

    RCV.NXT = next sequence number expected on an incoming segments, and
        is the left or lower edge of the receive window

    RCV.NXT+RCV.WND-1 = last sequence number expected on an incoming
        segment, and is the right or upper edge of the receive window

    SEG.SEQ = first sequence number occupied by the incoming segment

    SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 = last sequence number occupied by the incoming
        segment

  A segment is judged to occupy a portion of valid receive sequence
  space if

    RCV.NXT =< SEG.SEQ < RCV.NXT+RCV.WND

  or

    RCV.NXT =< SEG.SEQ+SEG.LEN-1 < RCV.NXT+RCV.WND

  The first part of this test checks to see if the beginning of the
  segment falls in the window, the second part of the test checks to see
  if the end of the segment falls in the window; if the segment passes
  either part of the test it contains data in the window.